Hello, and welcome to my lecture where I share my thoughts on the use of artificial intelligence
in programming classes.
My name is Charles Severance, and I'm a professor at the University of Michigan School of Information
in Ann Arbor, Michigan.
So you may know me from some of my online classes, Python for Everybody, Three Million
Students, the largest programming class in the world, Django for Everybody, C Programming
for Everybody.
And I'm building a series of curriculums, a series of courses that lead towards what
I call a master programmer, which is a way to get people to become very skilled programmers
in shorter time by giving the essential foundations of programming rather than a four-year degree.
So it's much less than a four-year degree.
That's my goal right now is to make programmers faster and better.
So the goals of this presentation are not to make policy for my course or any other
course.
Policies really depend on the course and the goals of the course and the course material
and the instructor.
So don't use this as like telling your teacher that somehow they should change their policies
because of Dr. Chuck's talk.
These are just my experiences and opinions and ways I've learned things over time and
my theories and how I try to explain to my students about the good and the bad about
using AI when working in a programming, taking a programming class.
So to AI or not to AI, that is the question.
Well, I think the answer is you have to use it.
From now on, AI is part of software development.
You can't deny that.
You're not going to get a job if you say, "Well, I don't use AI."
Well, you better use it.
I want you to learn how to use it to make you a better programmer, not how to not make
you a better programmer.
It's like, "Oh, AI is good enough."
And any AI technique that I teach or anyone else teaches is going to be out of date so
quickly.
Everything is changing.
Every couple of months, things get better.
Sometimes I'm using a piece of AI and it's stuck on something and I'll set it aside and
come back in another month and the models will change and I'll like, "What about that?"
And it's like, "Oh, yeah, I'll fix that for you."
I'm like, "Oh, great."
But one thing I think is permanent forever, the better you understand programming and the
foundations of programming, the better you're going to be at using AI to help you develop
software.
The dangers of AI is that using AI does not mean that you don't need to learn anything
in a programming class or in a job.
Believe me, if the only thing you can do is do what AI does for you, then you're probably
not going to get a very good job.
And if you're taking a class, you become a better programmer, but then you rely on AI
to actually not study the class material and not learn the class material.
And then the first part of the course, it's particularly perilous because then you just
wasted all your time and money, took a course, and now you didn't learn anything.
And AI caused you to not learn anything.
My thinking on this has evolved over time.
So we first heard about AI, like I was in the middle of teaching winter semester 2023.
We had a quick faculty meeting.
We pretty much all, without you coordinating, we just knew that we weren't going to prohibit
AI in programming classes.
We wanted to find a way to teach with AI, and we wanted to find a way to use AI wisely.
So for about a year, year and a half, I kind of adjusted my class.
More paper stuff, et cetera, et cetera, and it had mixed results.
The thing I didn't like about it was, and this is true going back over a decade, every
time I build something that tries to force students to do something my way rather than
the easiest way for them, I harm the students who want to learn, and I don't really stop
the students who don't want to learn from taking the easy way out.
So really, from last semester onward, I'm just treating AI like Stack Overflow.
I'm not uniquely thinking about it, not doing anything to help it, not doing anything to
stop it.
As a teacher, you might think it's great to go to college and snap your fingers and get
A's in all your classes, and in one day, you get a degree and you graduate, and you want
to get a great job.
Unfortunately, when you go to school, you're supposed to learn something.
So I'm a teacher, and I'm part of your schooling.
So I feel that my job is to take some set of materials, maybe a programming language,
and change how you know about it.
You don't know something before, and you do know something after, and I got 15 weeks to
do that.
And believe me, I don't want to waste your time.
I really don't.
If I could grab a little USB thing and plug it into the back of your neck like they did
in the Matrix and teach you something, I would invent that, and I would do that.
The human mind just does not accept new knowledge that fast, okay?
And so we have to come up with a way, and we only have 15 weeks or 10 weeks or whatever.
So we have a short period of time and a lot of material to cover.
So how do we take a lot of material and cover it in a short period of time?
And the answer is, you break it into small, doable chunks.
The education word for this is the zone of proximal development, and that is the way
you learn is someone like me with an assignment or whatever pushes you outside your comfort
zone just a little bit, and then we hang out with you and help you through that, and then
you learn something.
And then a week later, you got a new comfort zone, we push you just a little bit out of
that comfort zone.
So we're keeping you under a little bit of stress each week that hopefully you're adding
some stuff up and you're retaining it.
So some teachers teach too much in a week and then you don't retain it.
I try to figure out how much I can teach you in one week that you will retain so your knowledge
builds.
Naturally, what you find is in the beginning of classes, the amount that I can teach you
in a week is smaller than what I can in later, right?
Because in the later classes, I can assume that all you'd remember most of the stuff
that I've already taught you in earlier classes.
And this is just natural, it's how you build classes.
The problem is, is these simple early assignments are much easier for you to complete, so students
who are tired, who are busy, who just came off of a summer vacation, they're like, "Well,
I don't really want to work hard this week, I'm going to work twice as hard next week,
so I'm going to have AI do the homework this week, yay."
So they do that and they're like, "Shoo, I got 100% and AI did it."
And then they promise that the second week, they'll work twice as hard and learn everything
in the first week and everything in the second week.
And they're like, "Oh wow, I wonder if AI could do this second week homework."
And then they do have AI do the second week homework.
And they keep doing this, not because they're bad, students are bad, I mean students are
mostly tired.
School is hard, especially when you're taking a course that has a schedule and a teacher
like me that's telling you what to do every week.
When I finally graduated with my PhD, someone asked me, "Do you miss school?"
I said, "I don't want any more deadlines, I don't want to be told to do any homework
on a time."
Learning's fun, but having deadlines isn't.
Unfortunately, those two things are connected.
If you're not forced to do something, you will delay it.
So here's the problem, let's just say weeks one through five in this particular course
are tractable for AI.
And AI is not really learning anything.
AI is no smarter at week five than it was at week one.
You're not teaching AI anything as you're going through this.
If you went through it, you'd be learning something.
But AI is already smarter than you and smarter than whatever.
So the problem is, is that you get to week six and for whatever reason, AI can't solve
your problem.
So then what you're forced to do in week six is you're really forced to either drop the
class or you have to learn six weeks of material in one week.
And you've been tired and busy and you've got other classes and it doesn't happen.
And seven days later, the class is going to take another step, seven more days, class
is taking another step.
And this is part of the class where the class is starting to speed up, we call it the knee
of the curve.
So you picked the exact wrong time to not know what was going on in this class.
And usually you have to drop the class or get a very low grade in the class because
about the one third to one half point is the place in most programming classes where AI
just can't do it.
Before AI, I always made my assessments real work.
So writing Django applications is the learning objective of the course.
Then I want my assignments to be writing Django applications.
And so the key thing there is, if I want you to know how to do something and then use AI
to do it, but you actually learn how to do it and AI makes it better for you, great,
I just taught you how to use AI to solve the learning objective of my course, which you
will then be able to do when you get in your job.
So my assignments integrate across many sources.
I mentioned I don't give you a little single paragraph that completely describes it and
then grade that.
No, you got to look at sample code.
You got to look at some code walkthroughs and demos.
I'm explaining concepts, right?
So then what you got to do is you got to learn the concepts and then you got to pull from
places and you got to synthesize all that together.
And so the problem is, is that AI just wants to look at a few paragraphs and then write
some code because it can't do that.
Like let's write a database application to store and retrieve autos and auto data.
Well, that's not what my assignments are.
My assignments are look at this code, adapt it, look at that code, adapt it, look at this,
read this thing, adapt it, watch this lecture, adapt all that stuff together and synthesize
it together and then build a piece of software, not just to solve the problem, but to solve
the problem using the techniques that you saw in all the stuff that was in the class.
Now that doesn't mean that you can't give AI enough context.
If you were really organized and you figured out every single asset that was in the course
this week and you could somehow feed it into AI and build AI's understanding up and said,
okay, now using the stuff I just gave you, write an auto tracking, automobile tracking
application.
You might get it.
It might.
It's not dumb.
And if you are smart enough to give it enough context to solve one of my assignments, I
actually kind of gained some respect for you.
And my teaching assistants will sit down in a meeting and tell me, oh yeah, I feed it
all into AI.
I've got these 14 things in AI and then I tell it to write the code, boof, they probably
fed the sample solution in as well.
And so yeah, the AI is pretty smart at that point.
So my auto graders for the software look for specific techniques, not just any old technique,
but the specific techniques from my course materials in your solution.
You can't just take and argue with me and say, you told me to write an automobile database
and I wrote an automobile database.
Too bad it didn't pass the auto grader.
Another technique I have is cumulative exams.
So like in week one, two, three, and four, in order to discourage you from just using
AI, I say there'll be a midterm and that midterm will be cumulative.
And so if you take weeks one through five plus a little bit and you think you can do
that in one week with AI, great, good luck with you.
The exams are going to be more difficult.
They're going to be potentially as difficult as weeks one through five combined.
And if you know everything in week one through five, they're pretty easy.
But if you don't, you're not going to do it.
And so I generally use about half or a little under half of my scores.
Exams are calculated based on exams.
And so if you get 100% on the exam assignments and you don't do well on the exams, you kind
of have a 50% in the class.
And so that's another motivation to not just depend on AI because AI won't be able to do
the exam for you.
And so, I mean, I do let people do some exams online, but sometimes they're just so big
that AI can't get it right and the auto graders, like I said, are too specific.
So here's my recommendations.
Don't just rush to the assignments and just smash them out with AI.
I understand you're tired and you don't have enough time.
The problem is, is that that strategy will initially lead often to success, but that'll
reinforce your bad choice of not studying, right?
If you skim the material before and at least while you're working, and if AI is helping
you, maybe some pieces will stick in your mind as you're going through.
And don't be so impatient in the first few weeks.
The first few weeks are the easy part of the class on purpose.
So if you don't give yourself a chance to learn in the easy part of the class, you're
not going to learn in the hard part of the class.
Now, if you already know the material because that's the easy class for you, great.
You'll be using AI.
You know how to use AI.
You could do it in your sleep.
So that's not the student I'm talking to.
I'm talking about the student that's actually learning this material.
And again, the key is a programming course designed to stretch you and teach you a little
bit more every week so that when you're done, you can do something big.
AI is great and getting better.
This is a circuit layout tool that I'm building for a course, an upcoming course I'm going
to teach called computer architecture for everybody.
Hardware, how chips are made.
This is based on a piece of software that I learned in grad school like 25 plus years
ago called magic, came from my University of California, Berkeley.
That's why it's called Mystic because it's like my own version of magic.
This does circuit layout.
All those layers are polysilicon, n-dope, silicon, p-dope, silicon, metal.
You don't need to know this.
It's not a hardware class.
And literally, I just talked AI through building all this.
This is only a couple hundred lines of code.
And it's a reasonable facsimile of this semi-professional software called magic.
And the only part that I really helped in was the circuit simulation because that, you
know, maybe the AI will figure that out too eventually.
But I used some recursion and some other tricks to make the little pluses and minuses go.
But I've been doing these kinds of small tasks with AI for a while.
And I'll just say I'm really starting to believe.
I'm starting to believe that AI is more of a partner than like barely capable of doing
the simplest things.
And as I increasingly trust and believe in AI as my partner, I'm starting to communicate
with it as if it's more intelligent.
So my conversations with AI are longer, more jargon loaded, as if I was talking to someone
who is almost as good as me.
And so, and I will say that as I increase the sophistication with which I communicate
with AI, I am getting better results from AI.
And so this goes back to, if you're good at programming and you're good at understanding
problems, then your communication with AI can be at a much higher level with much more
detail and you'll get better results.
So thanks for listening.
I hope to see you in class or online, perhaps in the Ann Arbor campus or perhaps in an online
venue.
Cheers.